Write at the start of this talk,
we said the Java has different garbage collectors,
and we can choose which garbage collector to use by
passing a flag to the virtual machine.
So we'll see those flags here.
We pass ‑XX and then +UseSerialGC, +UseParallelGC,
+UseParallelOldGC to choose one of these garbage collectors.
There's also something called the concurrent mark and sweep
collector and also the G1 garbage collector.
And we'll take a look at how each of these collectors works now.
So the first collectors we'll take a look at are serial collector,
the parallel collector, and the parallel old collector.
These are all very similar,
and they all work in a way that we've seen previously.
So we have this concept of Eden space, survivor space, old space.
There's mark and sweep algorithms, and then there's a copy algorithm.
Where they differ is the amount of concurrency each collector has.
So the serial collector is single‑threaded,
which means this is a stop‑the‑world collector.
So we stop everything and run the garbage collector.
We can use mark and sweep as we've seen previously.
It does copying as we've seen previously.
And this collector is okay for small applications running on the client.
It's not suitable for large‑scale enterprise applications running on the server.
The parallel collector uses multiple threads for a minor collection,
but it has a stop‑the‑world single thread for major collection.
Apart from that, it uses the same process as the serial collector.
So again, Eden spaces, survivor spaces, old spaces.
It's exactly the same, but on parallel threads.
This collector is suitable for use on servers as the
concurrency helps the scalability of the collector,
and we have fewer stop‑the‑world events.
The parallel old collector is similar to the parallel collector,
but it uses multiple threads, both for minor and for major collections.
So when we're collecting the old space, we have multiple threads there as well.
And these days,
we tend to prefer to use this collector over the parallel
collector as with the parallel old collector,
we have concurrence,
both at during minor collections and during major collections.
We also have the concurrent mark and sweep collector.
Now this collector only collects old space as it only
runs during a major garbage collection.
And this collector is different to the previous collectors we've seen in that
it's no longer a bump the pointer allocation collector.
If you remember earlier, we looked at how memory is allocated.
In most circumstances,
we allocate memory and then simply move a pointer along to the next place
in memory and the next allocation that happens there.
The concurrent mark and sweep collector no longer works this way.
Instead, what the CMS collector does is it fragments the heap,
and it manages sets of free lists for each of these fragments.
It tries to allocate the object into one of these fragments and so has
to track these free lists and update the free lists.
And this, in certain circumstances, will cause the collector to run more slowly.
However, it's designed to be a low‑latency collector.
So the throughput should be much higher with this than it is with the
parallel collectors and the parallel old collectors.
The way the CMS collector works is that it goes through different phases.
Some of these phases are stop the world, and some of them happen concurrently.
So the phases of these.
There's an initial mark phase, and this is a stop‑the‑world phase.
And what this phase does is it follows all the root
references and marks those objects.
So this can happen very quickly.
So it's just the root references that are followed here.
There's then a concurrent mark phase.
And the concurrent mark phase traverses the object graph of the
objects that were marked in the original mark phase.
This happens concurrently.
We don't stop any threads.
We're just running this alongside all the current threads in the application.
So this should happen very quickly. If any allocations
are made while this phase is running,
then those allocations are automatically marked as live.
So again,
we go through write barrier, and that write barrier will just mark
the allocations and tell the garbage collector that these things
were live. There's then a remark phase. The remark phase is again
a stop‑the‑world event.
And what happens now is we look for objects that have been
allocated after the concurrent mark phase was stopped.
So again, we're ignoring all the previous objects that have been marked.
And again,
this phase should happen very quickly. There's then the concurrent sweep phase.
It's at this phase that we can free up all the objects that weren't marked
during the previous phase. And then, finally, we reset. And resetting just
resets everything ready for the next run.
So it works something like this.
Here we're showing an Eden space, a couple of
survivor spaces, and the old space.
In the Eden space,
we have allocated memory marked in green. And in the old
space, we have allocated memory marked in blue.
When a GC runs, objects that survived the garbage collect that are
below the threshold count for promoting to old space get moved to
the second survivor space just as in previous garbage collectors.
And then objects that have passed the garbage collection count are
promoted into old space.
But now we're not using bump the pointer.
Now these objects are allocated somewhere inside old space,
and that's shown by the dark blue areas on this diagram. When
the CMS GC runs and looks at old space,
any objects in old space that aren't marked will be removed.
So we end up with this fragmented space, and we end up with the fragments being managed by free lists.